README Update for Peer Testing (#278)
LoganParker/The-Speaking-Portal-Project: README.md

## Table of Contents

- [The Speaking Portal Project](#the-speaking-portal-project)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [General Information](#general-information)
  - [Tech Stack](#tech-stack)
  - [Setup](#setup)
  - [How it Works](#how-it-works)
    - [Overview](#overview)
    - [API](#api)
    - [The Phoneme Factory](#the-phoneme-factory)
      - [Rhubarb Output](#rhubarb-output)
  - [The Animation Factory](#the-animation-factory)
    - [Frame Data Output](#frame-data-output)
  - [Limitations](#limitations)

## General Information

The objective of the Speaking Portal Project is to design, develop, and deploy an API for the
[Kukarella text-to-speech (TTS) web application](https://www.kukarella.com/). This API will serve as an

> animation-generating add-on for this system so that the user can both listen to and watch an avatar speak the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
animation-generating add-on for this system. The generated animation will allow a user to watch an avatar speak the
```
Sentence is pretty wordy so would be nice to split, but not 100% on this alternative. Technically it's implied if you're watching it speak the provided text that you can listen to it I think?

Tested remotely via an AWS ec2 instance.

## Setup

> If the API is not yet integrated, you can still use the API locally on your machine using the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For local use of the API, follow these steps:
```

Reviewer: alternatively: 
```suggestion
You can setup the API locally via the following steps:
```

1. Install [Node.Js](https://nodejs.org/en/)
2. Install [ffmpeg](https://ffmpeg.org/)
   - We recommend following the steps on [adamtheautomator.com](https://adamtheautomator.com/install-ffmpeg/) for your

>    corresponding operating system. We also recommend the Powershell approach for Windows users.

Reviewer: I wonder if eventually we should just write out the steps from this tutorial?

Reviewer 2: I vote that we don't because installing ffmpeg is just a pre-requisite for our program and I feel like writing down all these instructions for the different OS's will take a lot more space than it should

Reviewer: You're also very right on that

4. Add the appropriate Rhubarb files to the repository
    1. Download [Rhubarb Lip Sync v1.13.0](https://github.com/DanielSWolf/rhubarb-lip-sync/releases/tag/v1.13.0) for
    your corresponding operating system
    2. Unzip and rename the folder to `rhubarb`
    3. Move the folder into the `speaking-portal-project` directory
    4. Delete the `extras` folder which is currently located at `speaking-portal-project\rhubarb\extras`
5. In the terminal, navigate to `speaking-portal-project`
6. Run `npm install` to ensure all packages are installed
7. Run `npm start` to start the API
8. Check in the terminal that the API is listening
9. Create the user's Kukarella files:
    1. Go to [Kukarella](https://www.kukarella.com/)
    2. Enter text, select a language, select a voice, and convert the text to audio
    3. Download the audio as a .wav file
    4. Download the text file
10. Use Postman or a similar platform to send a POST request (see [POST Request Properties](#post-request-properties))
to the local API that is currently listening for a request from step 7.
11. Wait for the API to process the request and return the video
12. Enjoy the animation!

## How it Works

### Overview

> The Speaking Portal Project (SPP) is built to connect with Kukurella's Text-to-Speech platform as an API. The SPP is broken down into three main components: **API**, **Phoneme Factory**, and the **Animation Factory**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Speaking Portal Project (SPP) is built to connect with Kukurella's Text-to-Speech platform as an API. The SPP is broken down into three main components: *The *API**, **The Phoneme Factory**, and **The Animation Factory**.
```

> ### API

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
Move this to line 87?

> Speaking Portal API creates an MP4 output animation from a synthesized speech file and text input based on Kukarella

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Speaking Portal API generates an MP4 animation from a synthesized speech file and text input based on Kukarella
```
"based on kukarella TTS" feels a little weird but not sure how to fix

Reviewer 2: what about....
```suggestion
The Speaking Portal API generates an MP4 animation from the synthesized speech file and text input from Kukarella
```

Reviewer: What exactly does synthesized in this context mean?

Reviewer 2: created, generated, produced

Reviewer 2: Resolving, as it was re-worded in another commit.

> TTS. Text input is first read and generated into phonemes output file via the rhubarb library. (Phonemes are the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TTS. Text and audio inputs are first processed and converted into a json file containing phonemes and their timings. This processing is done via the [Rhubarb library](https://github.com/DanielSWolf/rhubarb-lip-sync). (Phonemes are the
```

Reviewer 2: Wait, I thought it was converted to a JSON file, not a .txt file

Reviewer: ah you're right I was thinking of the animation frame one

> smallest unit of sounds that uniquely identifies words from one another.) Once a phoneme file is created, it is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
smallest unit of sounds that uniquely identifies one word from another.) Once a phoneme file is created, it is
```
Regarding phonemes, isn't it moreso a mapping from sounds within a word to the corresponding shape of a mouth?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, it's sounds, not words. It's a representation of the distinction of sounds

Reviewer 2: Resolving, as it was edited in another commit

> processed in a phoneme processor, which maps phonemes to  mouth assets. The mouth assets are then added onto an avatar

Reviewer: The mapping is done via the animation factory is it not?

Reviewer: Also mouth assets are already on the avatar

Reviewer 2: Since we added a phoneme type in our Typescript, we have it so that the mouth cues generated from the JSON file are actually phonemes now!

Reviewer: were they not always?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, that explanation needs to be adjusted

Reviewer 2: Completed in another commit. Resolving

> processed in a phoneme processor, which maps phonemes to  mouth assets. The mouth assets are then added onto an avatar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
processed by the animation factory, which maps phonemes to their appropriate avatar assets. This mapping is stored in a plain-text file which is then passed to ffmpeg to be processed. 
```
?

Reviewer 2: Resolving this conversation because it was resolved in another commit

> and rendered in a video file through ffmepg. The API, once request is received, initializes a node instance, creates a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### API
The API, once a request is received, initializes a node instance, creates a
```
If the above suggestion is accepted, then do this as well

Reviewer 2: Resolving this conversation because I included it in another commit

> `/tmp` directory for file I/O operations, and begins the animation process by sending all user inputs to main.

Reviewer: Technically this doesnt happen every time a request is recieved, when a request is received the files are stored within the already existing tmp directory and then the user inputs are read and processed

Reviewer 2: resolving this conversation because Logan found a better way and we already committed it

- We recommend referencing Port 3000 in addition to the IP address.
- File creation permissions must be allowed, or new files will not be created in `/tmp` directory.

#### Possible API Errors

| Error Code | Description |
| :---      | :-----     |
| 400 Bad Request | Required fields are specified |
| 403 Forbidden | Request is recognized by the server but refused. Likely due to connecting to the wrong port |
| 500 Internal Server Error | The API has not been configured properly on the host server machine |

### The Phoneme Factory

The Phoneme Factory is the first step in the SPP animation process. The factory is in charge of mapping spoken language
from the `audio` and `text` inputs into a series of phonemes. Phonemes represent the smallest units of sound within
words and help us distinguish when the mouth should change shape.

To map these phonemes, the `audio` file, `text` file, and `recognizer` selection is passed to the **Phoneme processor**,
which calls [**Rhubarb Lip Sync**](https://github.com/DanielSWolf/rhubarb-lip-sync). Rhubarb returns a JSON
[output](#rhubarb-output) that outlines every phoneme along with a `start` and `end` time interval tag.

> #### Rhubarb Output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Sample Rhubarb Output
```

```JSON
"mouthCues": [
    { "start": 0.00, "end": 0.08, "value": "X" },
    { "start": 0.08, "end": 0.23, "value": "B" },
    { "start": 0.23, "end": 0.37, "value": "C" },
    { "start": 0.37, "end": 0.44, "value": "G" },
    { "start": 0.44, "end": 1.42, "value": "B" },
    ... ]

```

Rhubarb uses the `recognizer` input to select the engine to use to during the process of creating a phoneme file. When
```recognizer: english```,  Rhubarb will use the `pocketSphinx` engine to process the english audio. When
```recognizer: phonetic```, Rhubarb will use the `Phonetic` recognizer instead. It has been observed that the `Phonetic`

> recognizer performs better.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
recognizer generates a response quicker, but provides a lower quality lip synchronization for the English language.
```

Reviewer 2: YES, thank you

Once the phoneme contents are created, they are sent to the next process.

## The Animation Factory

The animation factory uses the [phoneme output](#rhubarb-output) from the phoneme factory to logically select frames
from `speaking-portal-project/images` to generate the 2D animation. Each frame corresponds to exactly one phoneme,

> avatar, blink value, and body position. This frame data is compiled into a [frame data output](#frame-data-output) file.

Reviewer: I think these links are broken because when I tested it it kinda crashed my GitHub page but idk

Reviewer 2: we also broke the "rhubarb-output" link, so I can double check and fix them

Reviewer 2: fixed in another commit

### Frame Data Output

```JSON
file ./images/character01/X_eyes2.png
outpoint 0.08
file ./images/character01/B_eyes0.png
outpoint 0.20
file ./images/character01/C_eyes0.png
outpoint 0.07
file ./images/character01/G_eyes0.png
outpoint 0.07
file ./images/character01/B_eyes0.png
outpoint 0.98
```

The [frame data output](#frame-data-output) includes a path to the image and the duration of the frame for the animation
video. This file is then sent to FFMPEG, a highly portable library capable of rendering image frames into an mp4
output. Once the video file is created, it is then returned to the user as a response from the API.

## Example

Below is an example of the Barb avatar speaking, blinking, and changing poses.

<img src = "docs/documentation/Images/AmberAnimated.gif" width="250px" height="300px">

## Limitations

> - The phoneme generation process controlled via Rhubarb can be quite computationally intensive, and is the current

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The phoneme generation process relies on Rhubarb, which can be quite computationally intensive. This is the current
```

bottleneck for performance.

> - Blink frequency is chosen using a random probability

Reviewer: Didn't we decide this isn't really a limitation?

I mean realistically the lil animation can't get dry eyes so it would always need to blink randomly right? I like our probabilistic approach

Reviewer 2: LOL "lil animation can't get dry eyes"
I like our approach, too, and I don't think it's a limitation either. Let's check with the others before deleting it

> - Blink frequency is chosen using a random probability

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: Yeah this makes sense to remove

- Avatar poses are chosen at random. A suggestion for future development would be to include sentiment analysis on the

> text and choose appropriate poses; however, this depends on the poses provided by the artist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
text to choose appropriate poses.
```
Sentiment analysis isn't really dependent on the artist

Reviewer 2: I didn't word that part correctly, but I'm trying to say something along the lines of the poses provided by the artist might not be related to a specific sentiment, so if sentiment or some other analysis is added, then the artist should be aware of what kind of poses need to be included. If that makes sense

Reviewer: Ahhh. I see what you're saying - I think we could probably just say that that is sorta common sense though no?

Reviewer 2: I think leaving it short and sweet with your suggestion is a good way to go

the animation process then identifies which avatar assets to use based on the phoneme. Other features, such as blinks
and pose changes are added, and then all image assets are rendered in a video file through ffmepg.

### API

When the API receives a request, the uploaded files are stored in the `/tmp` directory. The API code then reads these inputs and converts them to the appropriate format for Rhubarb and ffmpeg. Upon conversion, the animation process is started by sending all user inputs to the `main.ts` file. 

Here's a typical example of the JSON sent in a POST request.

```markdown
{
  fieldname: 'audio',
  originalname: 'en-Amber.wav',
  encoding: '7bit',
  mimetype: 'audio/wave',
  destination: './tmp',
  filename: 'f8fc3bc5c3f0fbc70ab0899d0dc0c860',
  path: 'tmp\\f8fc3bc5c3f0fbc70ab0899d0dc0c860',
  size: 9049278
} {
  fieldname: 'text',
  originalname: 'en-text.txt',
  encoding: '7bit',
  mimetype: 'text/plain',
  destination: './tmp',
  filename: 'e05b5794e54ca3810b071b87bc1449e1',
  path: 'tmp\\e05b5794e54ca3810b071b87bc1449e1',
  size: 1363
} phonetic
```

#### POST Request Properties

> The SPP API is the first step in the animation process. Kukurella requests are sent to the SPP API as a POST with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kukurella requests are sent to the SPP API as a POST with the
```
Technically not part of the animation process and we say below that the animation factory is the first step

following required properties:

| Field      | Type | Description     |
| :---:       |    :----:  |        :---   |
| `audio`      | Wav file       | A file containing audio of the voice the user wishes to use for the generated mp4 output |
| `text`   | Txt file       | A file containing a textual script of what is being communicated in the Wav file      |
| `recognizer`   | String        | The recognizer for the language processor. Options include default as `english` and non-default `phonetic`. The English-only recognizer is slower but more accurate. The phonetic recognizer is faster but not as accurate, and it supports over 200 languages.      |
| `avatar` |  String  | Specifies  avatar animation choice for video output. Options include default `barb` or non-default `boy` |

#### API Constraints

- This API only responds to POST calls

> - This process is computationally intensive, as such expect a wait time etween requests. More user requests will result

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This process is computationally intensive, which may cause delay between requests. More user requests will result
```

Reviewer: If not, just fix 
```suggestion
- This process is computationally intensive, as such expect a wait time between requests. More user requests will result
```

in slower processing times
- The script text file should match the given audio file as closely as possible in terms of content. Failure to do so

> could lead to errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
could lead to lip synchronization errors.
```

> - Port 3000 must be referenced in addition to the IP address.

Reviewer: I mean technically someone could update this to use whatever port they want?

Reviewer 2: There are specific ports used for specific reasons. 3000 is technically arbitrary, but it's also known for not being used by specific things, so that's why it's typically used. If someone was told to use an arbitrary port and didn't know, then they might choose a port that was for something else and have issues. We could "recommend" instead of saying it's a "must"

Reviewer: I like the recommendation rather than obligation for this :)

- File creation permissions must be allowed, or new files will not be created in `/tmp` directory.

#### Possible API Errors

| Error Code | Description |
| :---      | :-----     |
| 400 Bad Request | Required fields are specified |
| 403 Forbidden | Request is recognized by the server but refused. Likely due to connecting to the wrong port |
| 500 Internal Server Error | The API has not been configured properly on the host server machine |

### The Phoneme Factory

> The Phoneme Factory is the first step in the SPP animation process. The factory is in

Reviewer: Don't we say the api is the first step above?

Reviewer: We do. Check out my suggestion on line 120

Reviewer: Hey wait,... shouldn't rhubarb technically come before this?

Reviewer: Because we need the phonemes before doing any sorta animation stuff

Reviewer 2: Rhubarb is basically the phoneme factory with a bit of code sandwiching it

Reviewer: yeah I just read the #'s wrong my b

Reviewer 2: Resolving because Logan and I discussed outside of GitHub and found a solution

charge of mapping spoken language from the `audio` and `text` inputs into a series of phonemes, which are units of sound
that distinguish one word from another.

> 

Reviewer: We should update to align with the description from the overview...

Reviewer 2: Resolving, as it was addressed in another commit

to the local API that is currently listening for a request from step 7.
11. Wait for the API to process the request and return the video
12. Enjoy the animation!

## How it Works

### Overview

The Speaking Portal Project (SPP) is built to connect with Kukurella's Text-to-Speech platform as an API. The SPP is
broken down into three main components: **The API**, **The Phoneme Factory**, and **The Animation Factory**.

The Speaking Portal API generates an MP4 animation from the speech file and text file received from Kukarella's
TTS process. Text and audio inputs are first processed and converted into a json file containing phonemes and their
timings. This processing is done via the [Rhubarb library](https://github.com/DanielSWolf/rhubarb-lip-sync). (Phonemes
are the smallest unit of sounds that uniquely identify distinct sounds within words.) Once a phoneme file is created,
the animation process then identifies which avatar assets to use based on the phoneme. Other features, such as blinks
and pose changes are added, and then all image assets are rendered in a video file through ffmepg.

### API

> Once the API receives the request, it initializes a node instance, creates a `/tmp` directory for file I/O operations,
> and begins the animation process by sending all user inputs to main.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the API receives a request, the uploaded files are stored in the `/tmp` directory. The API code then reads these inputs and converts them to the appropriate format for Rhubarb and ffmpeg. Upon conversion, the animation process is started by sending all user inputs to the `main.ts` file. 
```

Reviewer: Technical what is described originally is what happens when the API is started for the first time, not upon request

Reviewer 2: if you can edit api to API, I'll commit the suggestion!!

Reviewer: gotcha!

> Here's a typical example of the JSON used in a POST request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's a typical example of the JSON sent in a POST request.
```
